---
layout: post
title: "A Bonjour / Chat Tutorial For iPhone Developers"
---
MobileOrchard just published "a tutorial article by Peter Bakhyryev":http://www.mobileorchard.com/tutorial-networking-and-bonjour-on-iphone/, describing a sample iPhone app called "Chatty" that acts as a simple peer-to-peer chat-room.

bq. "In this tutorial, we are going to explore a simple chat application for the iPhone. It allows you to host your own chat room and advertise it on your local Wi-Fi network (in which case your app acts as a chat “server”) or find and join chat rooms hosted by other people on your network (acting as a chat “client”). Both announcement and discovery of chat rooms are implemented using Apple’s Bonjour protocol. The goal of this app is to show you how to use various networking-related frameworks available in the iPhone SDK version 2.x. The UI is minimal (consisting of only 3 simple views) - just enough to be able to play with the core functionality of the app without having to deal with complex UIKit code."

It's a well-written overview of everything from sockets to runloops to message framing, and it happens to basically describe what my "MYNetwork":http://bitbucket.org/snej/mynetwork/wiki/Home framework does. So an alternate way to read the tutorial is as a description of things you _don't_ have to worry about if you're going to use MYNetwork ;-) Because honestly, the stuff he's describing can be a real mess to deal with, and isn't that the kind of thing that should be solved once and stuffed into a reusable framework?

Now I am seriously tempted to download the app, replace its networking and messaging code with MYNetwork, and see how small it comes out. If I do, I'll be sure to post the results here.

bq. [ *Update:* I actually did it. "Here's my forked Chatty":http://bitbucket.org/snej/chatty/wiki/Home.]