---
layout: post
title: "Dogfooding Chrome"
---
As everyone knows who works in the pet-food industry (or computer software for that matter), it can be hard to start eating your own dogfood. Case in point: I just this week set Chrome to be my default browser, though I've been working on it for four months now.

Partly that's because when I started in July the Mac version of Chrome was too immature; and partly it's because a web browser is something you need to have running and working all the time -- especially since the Chrome project's bug tracker and code-review tool are web-based.

But Mac Chrome is quite stable enough to use now, and as I haven't been doing much Chrome development on this MacBook Pro lately (it takes too long to compile compared to my souped-up Mac Pro) I've installed the latest "dev-channel build":http://dev.chromium.org/getting-involved/dev-channel and replaced Safari with it in my Dock and as my default browser.

It's hard to get used to a new browser, after all these years. I remember that I dropped IE 5 like a hot rock as soon as Safari became useable, but that's because IE sucked so badly on OS X (as you youngsters may not remember.) But Safari is a great browser. Chrome's great too, but in different ways, and the Mac version's not finished yet so there are some missing bits.

I should note that I generally don't work on the user-visible parts of Chrome, rather the underlying WebKit engine; so I haven't been focusing on the UI much, or noticing the features being added, until experiencing them as an end-user.

In Chrome's favor:

* It definitely feels faster. At work I've been obsessing over some micro-benchmarks, but in regular use what I notice is simply that pages come up more quickly. I think a lot of this has to do with DNS pre-fetching, because DNS query times here at home can often be slow.
* The UI of the tabs is better than Safari's. I like that they take up less room (though without eliminating the title bar the way the Safari 4 beta did), and the transition animations when opening/closing/detaching tabs are extremely slick, definitely Apple-quality.
* The downloads shelf at the bottom of the window is more visible than Safari's little Downloads window, which always gets hidden behind the browser.
* The list of recently-closed tabs at the bottom of the new-tab page is very thoughtful and handy. In general I find the new-tab page more useful than Safari's, if less flashy.

Rough edges (remember, this is a pre-beta build):

* PDF display doesn't work well. There's no way to switch pages yet (making multi-page documents unusable), there's no zooming, the Save command doesn't work, and often the renderer process starts redrawing constantly and eating up CPU time.
* The only indication you have that a page is loading is the little 16x16-pixel spinning circle that replaces the tab's icon. I like the visual design of this, but it's too hard to find. I still miss the big progress bar in the address bar from Safari 1-3. (Cursor feedback would be nice -- wasn't there a browser once that put a little wristwatch badge on the arrow cursor?)
* The bookmarking UI is still unfinished and unpolished. In particular, there's no way to edit/move/delete bookmarks yet. I love the idea of being able to quickly bookmark by clicking a Google-y star icon, but in practice it pops up a floating panel for choosing a folder, which makes me think about where to put it just like Safari's bookmark sheet does. I'd rather the star button just added it to an "Unsorted" folder that I could open and organize later.
* Autofill doesn't seem to work as well as in Safari. For example, it won't autofill login forms until I type in the username; I think this may be a security feature, but I find it annoying.

I've been impressed by Chrome's stability too, for a pre-beta development build. The app hasn't crashed once, and I haven't even gotten the "Oh, snap!" page that shows that a renderer process crashed. (I've seen plugins crash a few times, but that's probably Flash's fault, and as in Safari on 10.6, this doesn't affect the browser or even the rest of the page.)

One thing I'm really looking forward to is "extensions":http://blog.chromium.org/2009/09/extensions-status-on-runway-getting.html. Safari's a closed system, and I've long been envious of the plethora of cool plug-ins available for Firefox. I'm looking forward to using, and maybe "developing":http://code.google.com/chrome/extensions/index.html, extensions for Chrome. (In the current dev channel Mac release, extensions can be installed, but the ones I've tried don't do anything yet.)