---
layout: post
title: "Open Source Good, Giving Away Art Bad?"
---
I just discovered that "a number of commercial artists are really insulted that Google approached them to create artwork, without offering to pay for it":http://drawger.com/taxman/?section=articles&article_id=7693. This did seem unreasonable to me ... until I read further and saw that this is for the Chrome browser.

Now, Chrome is open source. (Technically the open source project is a separate thing called "Chromium", but that's mostly an organizational detail; the code is the same.) So when I compared this controversy to the rather different attitude of the many programmers who've gladly contributed to Chrome and WebKit (and thus also Safari) without pay ... I went "hmm".

There's a long comment thread about this on "the LiveJournal of the talented cartoonist Rebecca Clements":http://kinokofry.livejournal.com/199482.html?view=1229114. The craziest comment I saw was by one "Anonymous":

bq. “Good will never paid a bill or put shoes on my child. I admit there should be some caring people in the world. But Google being kind ...so we all should be kind like them and give our work away? Come on give me a break. Someone in their executive chain of management has thought this through enough to realize it as a Public Relations "cool" thing to do to get more attention and drive people to Google as a source. It wasn't because they feel like being kind and giving something away.” "*":http://kinokofry.livejournal.com/199482.html?thread=1227578#t1227578

Maybe I'm especially pissed off at this attitude because I just spent most of my weekend "being kind and giving my work away":http://bitbucket.org/snej/murky/changesets/ (as well as the work of several others). And I'm sure much of the software these complaining artists use was created for free by open-source programmers. Do they draw with The Gimp or Inkscape? Use Firefox or Chrome or Safari? Run Linux or BSD? Host their blogs with WordPress or LiveJournal? (Let's just hope they're not using pirated copies of Photoshop or CorelDraw...)

So is there a double standard here, or am I missing something?