---
layout: post
title: "Murky Mailing List And Progress Report"
---
I've set up a "Google Groups mailing-list":https://groups.google.com/group/murky-app for "Murky":http://bitbucket.org/snej/murky/wiki/Home, my Mercurial version-control app. It'll be for both developers and users of the app.

Speaking of "developers", I've been really pleased with the reaction to my initial "source-dump":http://bitbucket.org/snej/murky/src/tip/Source/ to Bitbucket! So far, in nine days:

* "79 people":http://bitbucket.org/snej/murky/zealots/ have subscribed to change notifications;
* "10 people":http://bitbucket.org/snej/murky/descendants/ have forked the repository so they can modify the code;
* 8 people have contributed to the code, fixing bugs and adding some new features;
* "39 changesets":http://bitbucket.org/snej/murky/changesets/28b5bf11b6ca:c1069914bc82/ have been committed to the repository;
* "29 bug reports and feature suggestions":http://bitbucket.org/snej/murky/issues/ have been filed,
* "12 of which":http://bitbucket.org/snej/murky/issues/?status=resolved&status=invalid&status=duplicate have been fixed.

I'm especially happy about the patches I've received; I've gotten some in the past, but never this many or so quickly. Part of this is thanks to "Bitbucket":http://bitbucket.org, which (like its inspiration, Github) makes it so easy to share code and manage contributions. I've been getting more contributions to MYNetwork as well, since hosting it there.

My initial motivation was like Tom Sawyer whitewashing the fence -- I was hoping someone else would take over the project, since I'd run out of steam and hadn't done any work on it in a while. But what happened instead is that the attention got me enthused to work on it again, so I've made a lot of progress on it this past week. That's a good thing!, just not what I expected.

Now I think it's about time to put out an actual easy-to-download binary release of Murky, as some of the main bugs have been squashed and I have more confidence that it works for other people besides me. I'll probably do that this weekend, and mention it here as well as on the new mailing list (don't forget to subscribe.)