---
layout: post
title: "Let’s have some different iPhone board games!"
---
I like board games, and I'd like to play some against my iPhone. (My secret shame is that I'm actually rather bad at board games, but the silver lining is that it doesn't take much of an AI to provide me with a challenge!) The "Board Games":http://itunes.apple.com/WebObjects/MZStore.woa/wa/viewGenre?id=7004&mt=8 sub-category of the iPhone App Store has over 300 offerings. But if you filter out the ones that are really single-player puzzles, or that only let humans play each other, or that implement chess or checkers [neither of which I like] ... there aren't many left.

Especially if you then filter out the many duplicates. For example, I'm surprised at how many versions of "Ataxx":http://www.pressibus.org/ataxx/indexgb.html there are. Ataxx is a fairly obscure game (at least I thought it was!) but there are at least four different clones of it on the store, including a new one called "Spoilage":http://www.spoilagegame.com/ that just showed up. Why is that? Don't get me wrong, Ataxx is a really good game, with simple but unusual mechanics, and good tactical difficulty despite its short play time. I've played it online and I have iBacteria on my iPhone.

But why are so many developers picking the same game? With a better-known game like chess, checkers, Go or Othello/Reversi, I can understand going for the name recognition. But those wanting to develop different abstract strategy games have literally thousands to choose from. Don't believe me? Peruse my

h3. Big List Of Abstract Board Games You Should Implement And Sell Me:

* Dieter Stein's games "Accasta":http://accasta.com/, "Abande":http://abande.com/ and "Attangle":http://attangle.com/ form a trilogy, as they have similar mechanics and can be played on the same board (your choice of hexagonal or square). Of these, "Abande":http://abande.com/ is my favorite, and one of my favorite abstract board games overall.
* "Cameron Browne":http://www.cameronius.com/ has designed dozens of brain-twisting games with a topological flavor -- "Truchet":http://members.optusnet.com.au/helen.gilbert/truchet-game/ is a great example, with a _really cool looking_ board.
* Dutch mathematician Christian Freeling has developed many very interesting games, which are described on his "MindSports":http://www.mindsports.nl/index.php/side-dishes/more-games-by-cf website.
* "Arimaa":http://arimaa.com/arimaa/ is a fairly new chess-like game with some _very_ strange mechanics, where pieces can push and pull opposing pieces into holes to defeat them.
* "Mark Steere":http://www.marksteeregames.com/index.html has a good-sized collection of board games too.
* "Phutball":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phutball, aka "Philosopher's Football" is an interesting game with a loose soccer theme, invented by eminent mathematicians Elwyn Berlekamp, John Horton Conway, and Richard Guy.
* "Board Game Design Competition Winners":http://boardgames.about.com/od/freeboardcardgames/a/design_winners.htm from boardgames.about.com. (My favorite of these is "Symbio":http://boardgames.about.com/library/games/on/bl-8x8-symbio.htm.)
* The "Piecepack":http://www.piecepack.org/ game system has a ton of games written for it.
* ...and if those aren't enough, there's the "World Of Abstract Games":http://homepages.di.fc.ul.pt/~jpn/gv/ website, which compiles literally hundreds of games, old and new, neatly categorized.

So please! Go develop some of these, and sell them on the App Store, and I'll buy them! (Especially Abande. I really want a patient Abande opponent to help me improve my play!)

Even if you're not a game developer, most of these games are easy to play with boards you either have already or can print out. (And if you have access to a laser-cutter, "so much the better":http://www.flickr.com/photos/snej/2885410708/...)

<hr />

bq. *Footnote:* I haven't mentioned Go. I really like Go, although I'm miserable at it, and every time a Go-related app comes out I read its description eagerly; but so far none of them have AI play. They either let two humans play each other, or they merely play back saved Go matches to study. I suspect there's a technical problem here: Go is notoriously difficult to program AI for, and the only readily available implementation I know of is GNU Go. But this is GPL-licensed, and it wouldn't surprise me at all if the GPL were fundamentally incompatible with the iPhone's application model, since it's impossible to modify or recompile other people's apps. Anyone know for sure?

bq. *Footnote 2:* And WTF is up with all the tic-tac-toe apps? News flash, everyone: _Tic-Tac-Toe has been solved!_ No one ever wins a game if played correctly, and anyone with the brains to operate an iPhone should be able to play correctly. So what's the appeal? Are parents buying it as an easy way to win against their four-year-old kids?