---
layout: post
title: "Dear Lazyweb: Certificates in RDF?"
---
h3. Dear Lazyweb,

The project I'm working on will be using cryptographic certificates in a distributed web-of-trust model a little like that of PGP. It will also use certs as more than just proofs of identity. Given that I'll be writing a lot of code using certs, I want to avoid "the nastiness of X.509":http://www.cs.auckland.ac.nz/~pgut001/pubs/pkitutorial.pdf whenever possible.

After thinking about this a while, it seems to me that "RDF":http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/Primer.html ought to be a good way to represent certs, since it describes arbitrary types of relationships between entities (e.g. "FOAF":http://foaf-project.org), and allows them to be composed in complex ways. And there are a lot of tools available for "parsing/storing/querying RDF":http://librdf.org/.

Unfortunately, I know very little about RDF so far, or about the uses to which it's being put. I've been looking, but I haven't found any existing schema yet for using RDF for cryptographic certificates. Does anyone know of such a thing, or something related?

(The closest thing I know of is SDSI, a "Simple Distributed Security Architecture":http://people.csail.mit.edu/rivest/sdsi11.html, which was inspirational to me in showing how one can use general-purpose data structures like S-expressions to describe certs and form a web of trust. But SDSI and its successor "SPKI":http://world.std.com/~cme/html/spki.html seem to be dead, sadly, and nothing comparable has replaced them.)

*Thanks,*

--Jens

h3. Update, 30 January:

No answer being forthcoming, and given the learning curve of RDF, I'm now pursuing the approach of representing certs in "YAML":http://yaml.org. I also considered "JSON":http://json.org, but YAML is essentially a superset of JSON that has some very useful features like tagging and aliasing.