---
layout: post
title: "My Debt To Arthur C. Clarke"
tags: [me, sf]
---
Arthur C. Clarke's death hit me harder than other recent obituaries, even though it's been decades since I read much by him. His were some of the first science fiction stories I read, at the age of ten or eleven; and for several years after that he was my favorite author.

I remember, during one of our long summer trips visiting the extended family in Germany, finding one of his story collections in the small English-language section of a public library. I read it over and over and over. I don't remember which book it was, but it had some of his classic stories like "The Sentinel", which became the inspiration of the film "2001".

A bit later, it became my life's highest priority to see that film. I had the novelization, and the making-of book <i>The Lost Worlds Of 2001</i>, and the soundtrack record (which itself was a big influence on me musically). But this was before video rentals, when you had to wait patiently for a movie to show up in a theater. Fortunately there were correspondingly a lot of theaters that showed older movies; but it still took months of poring over the newspaper theater listings before I finally found a showing of "2001" and dragged my dad to take me to see it. And it was worth the effort: I'd never seen anything like it. (This must have been 1976 or early '77, since it was before "Star Wars" came out.)

Clarke wrote a lot about space travel, but when I think back, what really blew my mind about his fiction wasn't space but <i>time</i>. He was good at portraying far distant, alien futures, as in the book <i>The City And The Stars</i>, set on an Earth turned desert, lit by a burning-out Sun, with only one city left (thanks to its "eternity circuits" that defeat entropy and keep everything the same.) I also remember a story from that book I read in Germany, in which a future dictator has himself put into suspended animation in a sealed vault, and Clarke describes the infinitely slow processes of geological change taking place outside as millions of years pass, before he awakens.

It's fourth-dimensional vertigo, staring dizzily into time, and I'm forever in his debt for acquainting me with it.