---
layout: post
title: "iPhone Developer Rejections Top 10,000"
---
CUPERTINO, California—March 14, 2008—Apple® today announced that more than 10,000 iPhone™ developers have received enigmatically-worded rejection letters for the beta iPhone Developer Program. The iPhone Developer Program provides developers with a complete and integrated process for developing, debugging, and distributing applications for iPhone and iPod touch, complete with real-world testing on iPhone.

“Developer reaction to our email has been incredible with more than 1,000 snarky posts and irate comments on high-profile Mac websites,” said Philip Schiller, Apple’s senior vice president of Worldwide Product Marketing. “Also, over one hundred programmers, some real hotshots at big software companies, have been seen sobbing inconsolably at their Mac Pros, further demonstrating the incredible interest developers have in creating applications for the iPhone.”

"Apple gave us amazing tools that let us create a very functional demo in less than two weeks," said Rand Race, hotshot programmer at big software company Prosolar Mechanix. "It was all lovey-dovey during our demo at the launch ... but then they took away our magic developer key before we left the Apple campus, and since then we haven't heard diddly-squat from them." Race denied spending the days sitting next to the phone waiting for a call from Apple, but did admit to configuring a special Mail rule that would respond to email from iphonedev@apple.com by playing the Angels' 1963 hit "My Boyfriend's Back".

*Pricing & Availability*

The free beta iPhone SDK is available immediately worldwide and can be downloaded at developer.apple.com/iphone/program. Too bad it only lets you run your apps in the cheesy simulator window, eh? The iPhone Developer Program will initially be available to a couple of developers that we like a lot better than you. Face it: they're smarter, younger, and Steve doesn't think their apps look horsey. Not like yours.