---
layout: post
title: "How to get an iPhone without a service contract and save $$$"
---
Two of the downsides of the iPhone are the two-year indentured servitude to AT&T, and the cost of the <a href="http://www.apple.com/iphone/easysetup/rateplans.html">service plans</a> (well, they're not <i>that</i> expensive, but it's 50% more I was spending on my Sidekick.) But I inadvertently found a way around both those problems.

<!--more-->

My wife and I had gotten our <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/18/business/yourmoney/18money.html?ex=1300338000&en=679b5dd491c851cd&ei=5090&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss">credit reports locked</a> a few years ago. You can write letters (by snail-mail) to the credit agencies telling them not to let anyone see your credit report. This almost eliminates junk credit-card offers, and keeps sleazy people who've gotten your SSN from using it to get lots more information.<p>It does mean, though, that you can't do things on a whim that require credit checks ... as I found out when the AT&T, in the privacy of my living room, turned me down for a service contract. I'd forgotten all about the credit report lock.</p><p>But that turned out to be a _good thing_. Because if (and only if) you don't qualify for a regular service plan, AT&T will offer you instead the month-to-month "<a href="http://www.wireless.att.com/cell-phone-service/cell-phone-plans/pyp-cell-phone-plans.jsp?WT.svl=calltoaction">GoPhone</a>" plans. These are supposedly suckier because they come with fewer minutes and you pay more per extra minute; but they're cheap ($30+), and I don't make a lot of voice calls so I don't care about having "only" 200 minutes a month. It's the unlimited data I need, and that's the same $20 as in the regular iPhone plans. So the total comes to $50 a month, versus a minimum of $60 for the cheapest regular plan. And they'll automatically charge my credit card, just like normal; it's really not like being on food-stamps at all.</p><p>So I got an iPhone without a service contract, and I'm saving $10 a month. Score!</p><p>If you live in one of the states that allows credit-report locking, you should be able to do this too; the drawback is you have to plan ahead, <a href="http://www.bankrate.com/brm/news/cc/20030613c1.asp">writing letters to the credit agencies several weeks in advance</a>.
</p>