---
layout: post
title: "I'm a qwitter"
---
I have "backed up all the tweets":http://tweetake.com/ from my Twitter account (@snej) to a local file, and am now "mass-deleting":http://twitwipe.com/index.php all of them. This is a venerable form of protest that goes back to early BBSs like the WELL. Basically, I am no longer willing to donate my 'valuable' user-generated content to a centralized service that issues "fuck-yous of this magnitude":http://groups.google.com/group/twitter-api-announce/browse_thread/thread/c82cd59c7a87216a?hl=en_US to its developers and users.

I could rant at length about the arrogance, stupidity and just plain creepiness of that message and the policies behind it, but I don't know that it's even worth it. "Others have already done a pretty good job":http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/twitter_tells_developers_to_stop_building_twitter.php of deconstructing its marketroid Newspeak. I just can't resist pointing out that two of the major components of Twitter's content model -- the @-mention and the #hashtag -- were invented by early users and app developers, not by Twitter itself, then later integrated directly into the system to make them more useful. That's a great example of collaborative development. Now, perversely, Twitter sees fit to "tell app developers":http://dev.twitter.com/pages/display_guidelines exactly how they can and can't represent those same features in their UIs. 

And yes, this is enforceable, because thanks to OAuth they can and will revoke an app's access to Twitter at the flick of a switch. They brag about how they "revoke literally hundreds of API tokens / apps a week" _[ibid]_. I just now realized the implications of this, actually. OAuth may be more secure than traditional HTTP auth in that it doesn't give apps access to your account password, but the centralization of control that it gives to service providers is really disturbing.

"But Jens", you say, "you still have accounts on other centralized social networking sites such as Facebook, Tumblr, LiveJournal and flickr, many of which have also shown a similar disregard for users and developers. Why aren't you deleting those accounts?"

Good question, anonymous readership. It comes down to three factors:

# These other services feel more like real apps, with idiosyncratic features. Twitter has always seemed more like (and promoted itself as, at least to developers) a general purpose platform. It's a series of tubes for publishing and subscribing to 140-character blobs. I could ignore its stupid star-shaped topology, centralized control, and frustrating payload limitations ... as long as it stuck to being a generic service. Now they're taking that back. It's as though the phone company is telling me what color of telephone I'm allowed to plug into their lines and what size the touch-tone buttons have to be. (Think that's a silly example? The old monopoly AT&T "actually did enforce":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hush-A-Phone_v._United_States that "ludicrous degree of control":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carterfone until court rulings in 1956 and 1968.)
# Some of these services are, frankly, a lot more important to me than Twitter. I am basically on Twitter mostly to keep up with some friends/acquaintances who post about their daily lives there. (It makes me very sad that some of those friends once used to post far more meaningful content on a regular basis on LiveJournal. I miss those days.) But even though I keep my list of follows really small, my stream still has so many retweets and links to random URLs and unreadably-shorthanded opinions, that it's often more frustrating than useful.
# Finally some of those services just haven't done anything particularly evil yet. Turns out I can put up with innocent everyday "failure":http://www.tumblr.com/503.html pretty well when I'm not paying anything for it.

The big question in my mind is what to replace Twitter with. Ironically (and perhaps pathetically) I think I will end up reading Facebook more, because some of my Twitter friends are also there. At least until the next time Facebook does something egregiously evil.

In a larger sense, it should not be rocket science to build some plumbing that does what Twitter does -- publish and subscribe small blobs -- with an actually-decentralized architecture. There are a lot of smart developers out there, but to some extent we've been seduced into suckling at the proprietary API teats of big providers, at the expense of developing the next generation of open protocols.

Yeah, in my current day job I'm as guilty of this as anyone else. But at home I've got a garage full of various pieces of half-built tech that attempt to solve that problem in one form or another, if I could ever finish any of them. A lot of the trouble is motivation. Anyone want to help out?