---
layout: post
title: "The Ballad Of badtz-maru"
tags: [fiction, poetry, computers, humor]
---
I had a "tiny Linux box":http://206.14.132.88/products/Travla/c138/C138.html
Its name was "badtz-maru":http://www.badtzmaru.com/ ;
It sat out in the office
"Serving tunes":http://www.slimdevices.com/su_downloads.html for me and you.

One day the "Squeezebox":http://www.slimdevices.com/su_downloads.html just went black!
I didn't know what to do!
Safari, ssh and ping
Lost touch with badtz-maru.
The living room was silent
(Between games of "Pikachu":http://cube.ign.com/articles/656/656659p1.html).
<!--more-->
Last weekend I rolled up my sleeves
And grafted on a head
So I could hack at badtz-maru
And raise it from the dead.

The boot parade scrolled by, but then
With sinking heart I read
Of errors in filesystems,
Evil things best left unsaid.

I grabbed my dusty "Linux book":http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/runux3/index.html
And then without delay,
Lips moving with the effort,
Typed in "'fsck'":http://www.die.net/doc/linux/man/man8/fsck.8.html.

The battle raged! The disk fought back,
Its platters growing hot,
But I showed who was master
(by pressing "Y" a lot.)

One-two! One-two! And through and through
The "vorpal":http://www.jabberwocky.com/carroll/jabber/jabberwocky.html tool went hack!
The damage was deleted
From each "inode":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inode and track.

I raised a cheer, detached its head,
And went galumphing back
To the comfort of the living room,
And there cued up a track.

I have a tiny Linux box
Its name is badtz-maru
It sits out in the office
Serving tunes for me and you.

bq. Addendum: Some months after this was written, I grew tired of badtz-maru's noisy case fan and took the vorpal blade to it, dissecting out the hard disk and plopping it into a <strike>jar of formaldehyde</strike> USB drive enclosure, which I then plugged into "pancake", our Mac Mini. However, the disk is still named "badtz-maru".