---
layout: post
title: "Please wave “hello”!"
---
I always find this "blog" thing weird because, unlike more-centralized social network services, there's not an inbuilt sense of community. This is simply a black box into which I type words, and they pop out on a page, and someone might or might not be paying attention. It makes me feel like I'm Helen Keller standing on a soapbox.

I know there are "services":http://technorati.com that help you find out who's writing about you [_centralized_ services ... so much for blogging as a distributed platform.] So I'm getting myself all signed up with those, in anticipation of nervously re-checking my blog rank every 15 minutes.

But it's not the same as comments. Comments are the spare change of the attention economy. There is no one so rich they don't get a thrill out of finding a quarter on the street. To continue the strained analogy above, it's like I'm holding a hat in my hand as I lecture/declaim/narrate/confess from my soapbox, and I feel the little clinks of the coins falling in and it's like they're spelling _I hear you, you're interesting_ into my palm.

*Therefore, I am asking of you reading this that you please comment on this post.* Just a quick "Hi, I read your blog", like a wave or passing-in-the-hallway smile. Thanks.

*PS:* For the occasion, I've enabled "OpenID":http://openid.net authentication for comments. If you have a LiveJournal or TypePad account, or another form of OpenID, you can just enter it in the comment form.